= ParamChecker

ParamChecker is a small Ruby library for validating and casting string parameters. It is for example a handy way to check GET/POST parameters in Rails or Sinatra.

== Installation

  gem install param_checker

or add ParamChecker to your Gemfile

  gem 'param_checker'

and afterwards (when using the Gemfile) execute

  bundle install

== Usage

Include the ParamChecker module where ever you like. I usually put it into my Rails <tt>ApplicationController.rb</tt>

  class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
    include ParamChecker
  end

You can then simply call for example <tt>check_string(params[:name], "Mia", :allowed => ["foo", "bar"])</tt> in every controller.

Instead of including the module you could also call all methods of the module directly, like

  ParamChecker.check_string(params[:name], "Mia", ["foo", "bar"])

ParamChecker uses five methods:

  check_integer(param, default, options)
  check_float(param, default, options)
  check_string(param, default, options)
  check_symbol(param, default, options)
  check_boolean(param, default, options)

where the function parameters are:

* <tt>param</tt>: The string parameter to check.
* <tt>default</tt>: The value that will be returned when +param+ does not pass the check.
* <tt>options</tt>: Function specific options to check +param+ against:
  * <tt>:min</tt>, <tt>:max</tt> in <tt>check_integer</tt> and </tt>check_float<tt>: The minimum and maximum allowed values of param. If it is not provided then no range is checked at all.
  * <tt>:allowed</tt> in <tt>check_string</tt> and <tt>check_symbol</tt>: Represents the allowed values of <tt>param</tt>. It can be either a regular expression, a string (resp. a symbol for <tt>check_symbol</tt>), or an array of strings (resp. an array of symbols for <tt>check_symbol</tt>).
  * <tt>:true</tt> and <tt>:false</tt> in <tt>check_boolean</tt>: Represents the allowed string values for true and false. Default is :true => ["1", "true"] and :false => ["0", "false"].

All methods return the casted value (check_integer returns an integer, check_symbol returns a symbol, and so on).

=== Examples

Below are some simple examples how to use ParamChecker:

  # Check if per_page parameter is a valid integer representation, ensure that it is bigger than 1 and smaller than 100 and return its integer value. Otherwise return 10.
  page = check_integer(params[:per_page], 10, :min => 1, :max => 100)

  # If field parameter is equal to "name" or "address" then return it, otherwise return "name".
  field = check_string(params[:field], "name", :allowed => ["name", "address"])

  # Return the boolean if params[:accepted] is a valid string representation of a boolean and return false otherwise.
  accepted = check_boolean(params[:accepted], false)

  # Custom boolean string representation values.
  accepted = check_boolean(params[:accepted], false, :true => ["yep", "yes"], :false => ["nope", "no"])

== Alternative usage

Since version 0.3 you can also extend your Hash or HashWithIndifferentAccess with ParamChecker::HashExt. This will allow you to directly call the ParamChecker methods on the +params+ hash:

  params.check(type, keys, default, options)

<tt>type</tt> can be:

* <tt>:i</tt> or <tt>:integer</tt> calls check_integer internally
* <tt>:f</tt> or <tt>:float</tt> calls check_float internally
* <tt>:s</tt> or <tt>:string</tt> calls check_string internally
* <tt>:sym</tt> or <tt>:symbol</tt> calls check_symbol internally
* <tt>:b</tt> or <tt>:boolean</tt> calls check boolean internally

<tt>params_key</tt> can be either an array of keys or just one key to access the hash.

=== Examples

    # Checks params[:page] and returns the integer representation if valid.
    params.check(:i, :page, 5, :min => 1)

    # Check params[:company][:name] and returns "Comparilla" if invalid.
    params.check(:s, [:company, :name], "Comparilla")

    # Does exactly the same.
    params.check(:string, [:company, :name], "Comparilla")

== Testing

ParamChecker uses RSpec for testing and has a rake task for executing the provided specs

  rake spec

Copyright © 2010-2011 Kai Schlamp (http://www.medihack.org), released under the MIT license
